
---


---

First Contact
---
  
2017-01-12  
https://youtu.be/igZi4iyJiq0  

---

So today we are continuing our look at alien civilizations by discussing the concept of first contact with an alien civilization. This is much too broad a topic for just one episode so we will be saving some concepts like language for future episodes. We will also be placing an emphasis today on a lot of the misconceptions of this idea from science fiction, continuing last week’s theme of stupid aliens. 

**[00:00:36](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h00m36s)**  How such a first contact scenario goes down will depend a lot on their own psychology but we can’t know too much about that, just how certain qualities of the contact will impact logical actions. There are nine ways I could think of in which we might encounter aliens, in general terms, and here they are: 1. We’ve already met them They’ve been here before in the distant past, or are here now observing us or tinkering with our civilization. 2. We find their ruins We encounter an extinct species and are sifting through their ruins, contact is one way, us seeing them before they died. 3. We see signs of them from a distance Life, especially intelligent life, tends to leave a lot of telltales signs it exists. 

**[00:01:24](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h01m24s)**  Here there’s no overt contact either way, but this is still contact and it’s probably the most likely form. 4. We encounter them in deep space This highly improbable scenario is popular in scifi. This is our first example where live two-way communication is possible, and probably the scenario most likely to result in violence, as the captain will be wondering why the ship is quietly approaching one of your planets. 5. We hear them by radio We hear them or they hear us, and we have plenty of time to decipher the message and reply if we choose to. 6. By Instant but Distant Communication Unlike the former, if we assume some sort of faster-than-light, or FTL, means of communication, this is our second form that allows real-time communication, but doesn’t appear to include danger or urgency, at least not at first glance. 7. We come to them Here we find some species who either does not yet have spaceflight or just doesn’t much use it, which makes a big difference. Once more real-time communication is possible. 

**[00:02:34](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h02m34s)**  8. We meet them through a third party Probably one of the first questions you’d ask another alien civilization is if they know of anyone else, the answer could easily be yes and you would want the details about them, but would need to be worried about skewed perceptions or even outright lies. 9. They come to us Our last one, though probably the most common in fiction, is that an alien ship comes to us and makes contact, peaceful or not. I tend to like to save this for last when discussing this topic because so many of our misconceptions in regard to it come from not determining reasonable behavior in advance. Now before we jump into these we will make a few assumptions. We can’t be sure about any of these but they are all ones that ought to be true of nearly anyone we should encounter and odds are that any exceptions will be few and far between and we’d have met some other critters first who do follow our assumptions in order to get some practice doing it right before meeting oddballs. 

**[00:03:37](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h03m37s)**  So what do we know? A given alien civilization was either designed by nature or by some intelligence, if the former they will be inclined toward survival and pretty good at it, evolution works on survival of the fittest and isn’t gentle with those who are neither fit nor interested in survival. If the latter, people made by someone else, it would seem likely they’d include self-preservation as a desire too. 

**[00:04:04](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h04m04s)**  If we created an artificial intelligence that was designed to operate on some task autonomously, so that we weren’t present, we would include some self-preservation motivation. This might vary from minimal self-preservation to extreme. A robot that will cheerfully perform a suicidal task to one which would not even take a 1% chance of injury to save millions, but it will have something designed to preserve it. This could include organic lifeforms too, like a species created or modified heavily away from their natural form. 

**[00:04:36](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h04m36s)**  Now I don’t include that self-preservation or autonomy on my toaster, but that’s because it is not meant to operate autonomously, it won’t be making first contact with aliens, I will be, unless they visit my home and mistakenly assume it is the dominant intelligent life form. For today’s purpose we are assuming the aliens are not stupid though, that’s our next assumption, they want to survive and they are clever. 

**[00:05:01](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h05m01s)**  Such being the case they will not have identified my toaster as intelligent and me not as intelligent. 

**[00:05:06](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h05m06s)**  You just have to be monumentally dense to miss the signs that Earth has intelligent tool-users on it, what with the radio &amp; TV signals, satellites in orbit, and all those mysteriously squared shaped rocks and trees with glass windows in them and wires and roads running to them. My toaster is not mobile, on first inspection they couldn’t distinguish it from my computer, microwave, or TV if it was off, and maybe they’d think it consumed bread. But my doorway’s size, its doorknob, all the handles and chairs and so on, including photos of friends and family on the walls, start to generate a picture. 

**[00:05:43](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h05m43s)**  It’s one thing to mistake a stone axe for a natural object, stuff like the Giant’s Causeway in Ireland can incorrectly look artificial too, but it is another thing to mistake a garage and all the tools and vehicles in it for natural. 

**[00:05:57](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h05m57s)**  So we can assume aliens are intelligent if they have technology, and we will recognize technology. More accurately we will recognize intelligence, intelligence knows intelligence. 

**[00:06:09](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h06m09s)**  At least any type which will have technology, since that implies curiosity and a value for knowledge and a desire to use it to alter your environment to enhance survival. There may be exceptions to this, but I suspect not for reasons we’ll discuss in the future. 

**[00:06:26](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h06m26s)**  Ditto, it is possible some species might evolve as natural spacefarers, around a collection of small moons for instance, but it is unlikely, so spacefaring means technology. And technology means they know math and science, which is the keystone of communication with them. To communicate with someone you need shared concepts, the only universal concepts are things like math and basic physical principles or things found Universe-wide. 

**[00:06:56](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h06m56s)**  So technological civilizations, especially those who can explore space, will be survival-oriented, smart, curious, and clever. They will also recognize technology and know it means intelligence made it. This brings up another Stupid Aliens moment from classic science fiction, and from one of the best authors who normally does aliens amazingly well. Ender’s Game by Orson Scott Card shows us an example of an accidental violent first contact situation between humanity and a race called the Buggers. In this case the aliens arrive in our solar system and attack and board our spaceships and kill crew members and eventually seriously damage China before their first expedition is defeated. 

**[00:07:39](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h07m39s)**  They send a second one too which barely loses after a massive space battle in our solar system. Here’s the thing, afterwards the realization comes that the Buggers never realized we were intelligent because they’re really hive mind entities who communicate telepathically. We could never talk to them because they simply have no concept for language. Yet the implication is that the Buggers didn’t realize we were intelligent till after they failed to invade us twice, even though both times they encountered spaceships. It’s not hard to distinguish a spaceship from a meteor at a distance, and certainly not when one is boarding one and murdering its crew, so why would one ever think something that was clearly a spaceship was not the product of a highly intelligent species? It is still a great book series and one I highly recommend, and the author makes some attempt to fix that issue in later books. 

**[00:08:31](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h08m31s)**  I suspect the mistake comes from him expanding a short story into that book as a pseudo-prequel to Speaker for the Dead, another great book which features quite clever aliens making another first contact screw-up with us which I won’t spoil. 

**[00:08:45](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h08m45s)**  So let us go through our list of nine in order now and consider what is significant about each. This begins with case where we’ve already met them but basically did not know it. A classic staple of scifi is that aliens walk among us, or used to back in the old days. What their motivation for doing this activity might be varies a lot. Maybe they’re plotting a takeover, maybe they’re teaching us to build pyramids, maybe they’re doing some anthropology. I figure the assumption of curiosity in technological species makes anthropology a common field for their own past and probably one that would still apply to aliens. I have difficulty imagining our own anthropologists wouldn’t give their right arm and maybe a leg to study an alien civilization and that’s not likely to be limited to humans. Now for first contact we have a few specific things. First, it’s already happened, we just didn’t know about it as a species, maybe some of us did, maybe none did, maybe we misinterpreted it as gods or whichever, doesn’t matter. Second, it means they already have an advanced knowledge of us including our language and customs, so the responsibility is entirely on them not screw up that first contact. It’s not an excuse for us to be jerks or idiots, but we don’t know much whereas they do. Third, we certainly have a right to ask why they were here without formally revealing themselves and to expect a good answer. They also don’t have a right to be shocked by that since they should know our own psychology, so they ought to have a good logical reason ready. When contemplating those it’s important to do a role reversal and ask how we’d respond to people we’d been monitoring or overtly interacting with in the distant past. From a realistic perspective you don’t need to land on a planet that already has TV and radio to learn enough about them to talk, and also whoever you send down is likely to be an android. It’s a lot safer to remotely pilot a robot body from orbit configured to look like the native life. Not necessarily a person, a bird or dog or whatever is probably your best first bet. 

**[00:10:58](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h10m58s)**  The elephant in the room is privacy, because you are spying on people, those being spied on or doing the spying might not care about that as much as us but probably more importantly curious species, even those that care about privacy a lot, will recognize both the desire for knowledge and the legit concern of not wanting to screw up a first meeting or interacting with the unknown. Even with a technological advantage on my side I’d still rather not make friends with a race that is fanatically xenophobic and thinks Hitler would have been a great guy if he didn’t have the fault of being a dirty filthy human. Particularly since I would be expecting one of the first questions aliens would ask would be “Will you share some of your technology with us?” and I’d have a problem saying no. I’d also have a problem justifying observations that lasted generations. This also raises the question of who you contact, because you know enough to be selective. Do you contact a government? All of them? If not how many and which ones? Do you call the news and say you want to do an interview on TV and just hover your ship next to their broadcast studio so they know it isn’t a joke? There’s probably a right and wrong way to do this but I’d probably go the open route from day 1, just relying on what we could hear by radio and TV for the basics and broadcasting my hello on English on all the channels. Total honesty, here we are, we’re friendly, we’ve got some technology we’ll share but not all of it right away, and that we want permission for a small outpost on the moon or similar, a 100 year lease on some spot in exchange for some spaceflight technologies. Things are a different if we come across ruins of a civilization. Everything is archeology now and we have plenty of time to be cautious. 

**[00:12:43](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h12m43s)**  Both to avoid damaging stuff and in terms of whatever wiped them out. Killing off a technological civilization is quite tricky as we’ve discussed before so unless the method is obvious it behooves you to be cautious while digging around. Whatever killed them off might be a factor, and it could be something weird too like some existential crisis that induced depression and nihilism, not some overt doomsday device. 

**[00:13:10](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h13m10s)**  This does have a special case too. You see they might all be dead but that does necessarily matter. We can’t rule out that they might have had some bunkers that didn’t just include archives but frozen people too, but more to the point, it does not require any ridiculously advanced technology to find some DNA, possibly even just digital copies of it in such an archive, and grow a person. Or persons, or all their extinct species too. We’ve discussed that as a last resort option for environmental damage in the past, keeps frozen or digital DNA of extinct species for future resurrection when we’ve dealt with whatever ecological issues made it occur before. I think we would certainly want to uncover and preserve an alien species civilization if we found their ruins, but what about actually recreating them and their world? That’s not a first contact case of course, we would probably have to raise their first generation or two of kids so they would definitely know us and not really be the original civilization, though I suppose we could trick them by pretending to be them. I don’t recall any scifi covering such a scenario so it’s probably a pretty fertile ground for some, but from our perspective it is an interesting moral conundrum. Do you resurrect a planet if you can? And if you can, how do you do it? In secret or just tell the young new aliens the whole story, you killed yourselves off, we cloned you, we taught you, we brought you back and restored you. And can you imagine if someone showed up here one day and told us they had done that for us? 

**[00:14:44](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h14m44s)**  Now our next case isn’t contact either. It’s the notion that we see them from a distance, not communicate with them at all. This is our most likely way to become aware of alien civilizations too. Odds are the first life we find will come after we’ve detected indicators of it from back home here. For non-intelligent life, or at least ones not up to the point of doing TV and radio signals, we might detect a planet with an oxygen rich atmosphere, which is not conclusive indication of life but is a strong indicator. 

**[00:15:15](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h15m15s)**  Oxygen doesn’t like to stick around as a gas, it bonds to make rocks or water instead, so large amounts of it imply something is either preventing that or constantly making a new supply of molecular oxygen. Photosynthesis does that but not much else does, not that would be present in such large quantities as to keep an entire atmosphere oxygen rich. 

**[00:15:35](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h15m35s)**  At the bigger scale, we’re not really looking for radio signals in SETI anymore. Or we still do but not many expected that to work and decades of nothing much have sharpened that viewpoint. The better route is looking for folks who have been building dyson swarms. 

**[00:15:51](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h15m51s)**  First it indicates they are probably still around, since that implies they survived as a species long enough to engage in major space exploitation and that they are way less vulnerable to species obliteration now that they are spread out around their solar system. Even a now extinct species interest us, but looking for a long-lasting one increases the odds of finding them not only alive but at all, since they’re showing signs of their existence for longer. Second it can be seen a lot further away. 

**[00:16:20](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h16m20s)**  There’s no maximum range on detecting radio and TV signals, if you build a large enough telescope, but as a rule people don’t broadcast louder than they have to and a signal meant to be heard elsewhere on your own planet doesn’t need to be nearly as strong as one meant to be heard by the same antenna on another planet. Hundreds of kilometers away not hundred of light years, and there are about 10 trillion kilometers in a light year, and signals weaken inverse square to distance, so 100 trillion, trillion times weaker. Actually not as much since the big thing interfering with signals on Earth is the planet and atmosphere so it is easier to hear some signals over on the moon then the other side of the planet but that’s not too important today. Great big Kardashev-2 civilizations can get away with building telescopes that could pick up our TV broadcasts thousands of light years away, but they themselves are quite visible from all the light they are blocking and re-emitting as infrared, something we’ve discussed a lot in the Fermi Paradox episodes. Those ought to be detectable anywhere inside our own galaxy with modern equipment if we’re looking at them. More importantly a species building those up around many stars as they colonize their galaxy will be visible at extra-galactic distances. 

**[00:17:34](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h17m34s)**  You can look at places, even whole galaxies and see if they emit too much infrared basically. 

**[00:17:41](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h17m41s)**  Or too much radio. Even if you cannot figure what they are saying because it’s encrypted or you just can’t understand it you could see it going on. You can also look for signs of spaceships, some types of propulsion would be highly distinct and visible. We can’t talk to them, by listening anyway, we can send signals ourselves now, but we can being listening more closely to a candidate and begin drawing conclusions from what we can see. This gives you a much larger range to examine and since space is a volume, every time you widen your range by a factor of 10 you increase the possible targets by 10³ or a thousand. If we figure the nearest civilization is a thousand light years from us, we’d expect several more just a little bit further away in the other directions and we’d expect a thousand times as many within 10,000 light years. You might only be able to hear radio a thousand light years away but you could detect a Dyson swarm a lot further away. This raises another interesting point that applies to first contact because we always have three pieces of knowledge available the moment we meet or see aliens. The first is that they exist, but the second is that others do or did, because if we find one just a thousand light years away it strongly implies our galaxy would contain many thousands more. There’s around a million stars within a thousand light years of us and that implies technological civilization are about 1 in a million systems at least if you find another that close to us, there a few hundred billion stars in our galaxy and 1 in a million would mean a few hundred thousand civilizations. 

**[00:19:18](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h19m18s)**  A conclusion that other alien civilization will now also draw if they hadn’t already met someone else, if they have they can refine that number down a lot more too. But that’s the third thing, they now know the galaxy is pretty cluttered with civilizations if they didn’t already. And that changes the dynamics of first contact, because you’d have good reason to believe other critters might be watching or find out later what you did. So if you’re thinking about genocide you either have to wonder if folks who disapprove of that might see you doing it, and conclude that they probably will see it, or consider that they might not disapprove because it’s what they’d do, in which case an alliance with the intended victim against some big genocidal badass might be in order. And the Universe doesn’t end at the edge of the galaxy either, other galaxies aren’t spaced out like stars are, galaxies are more like small continents with lots of islands in between them, so intergalactic colonization and warfare is viable. Key point is, anything you do in space to another species you are probably doing for a live studio audience and the folks doing it will know that, so it will effect first contact, especially since it will probably be at their planet which is probably monitored by others, and those monitors might have gotten to like the folks they’ve been watching and so probably won’t frame you in the kindest light if they are reporting to their superiors that some hostile race just blew them to smithereens. 

**[00:20:46](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h20m46s)**  If you do run into another species in Deep Space it is less likely to be seen by others because monitoring a whole galaxy is a whole different story then monitoring every solar system in it. Of course if you do bump into another ship while traveling between the stars it is almost guaranteed that they are headed to whichever system you left and coming from whichever one you are headed towards. This pretty much necessitates you both stop and talk, which is a problem since you probably need at least weeks to actually slow down and you probably need to slow down to arrive at some chunk of rock and ice you can refuel off of. Space is just too huge for such a passage in the night to occur otherwise and it will be very obvious to both parties where you are headed and where you’re coming from. 

**[00:21:32](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h21m32s)**  They probably will stop too. If they’re explorers, they’ve just found something worth exploring. If they are colonists, they will want to know if that destination is now occupied. If they are invaders they will know they’ve been exposed. They can’t just blow you up either because you’d be transmitting home all the time anyway and even if you don’t have a constant signal home, which you would, they’d have to assume you would transmit once you detected them or have a black box designed to. A lot of interstellar ships would have thin tethers running behind them, or off to the side, to expand their view for detection, hard to spot such a thing till you’re closer enough you’d be spotted for sure too. Interstellar spaceships are not terribly covert objects even when they aren’t firing their engines. Which they’d do fairly often incidentally. 

**[00:22:18](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h22m18s)**  We’ve never discussed it in any episodes for time constraints but if you saw the space warfare episode you know the best defense against laser weapons, which are the fastest allowed by known physics, is to make the occasional small course correction. It doesn’t have to be much or use much fuel, you just pick a random direction and apply a little thrust. 

**[00:22:38](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h22m38s)**  A change of just a meter per second will mean someone a light day away won’t know your position to better than a couple hundred kilometers, and when you’re moving millions of meters a second doing a tiny thrust change like that every day is a minor fuel expense and a good diagnostic to make sure your engines are still working. We also didn’t mention that every interstellar ship has a battery of laser weapons on it that would intimidate modern major nation states. You need those to be able to vaporize any chunk of debris too small to see soon enough to dodge around. Those need to be powerful and automated, they also need to be guided by some very intense and active radar systems which won’t be terribly subtle either. 

**[00:23:20](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h23m20s)**  You have to have such things on your ship and you have an obligation to make sure they don’t shoot other ships. In the classic Scifi novel the Mote in God’s Eye we get an example of that. Here a solar sail ship shows up in a human colonized system and opens fire on the ship that approaches it transmitting hellos. This results in a reply that accidentally kills the lone occupant of the ship. The chief scientist for the system is enraged at the response to what he assumes was an automatic anti-meteor defense, but later an officer from that ship uses an analogy to point out that you have an ethical obligation to design any anti-meteor defenses not to open fire on neutral third parties. Now you might say how could they know how to identify one but a spaceship and a meteor do not appear even a little bit alike. Wrong speed, wrong shape, wrong heat signature, even if it is not spewing out megawatts of active radar. If you make an automated weapon you clearly do have an ethical obligation to make sure the odds of it targeting someone it should not are kept to a minimum. And you know it could be a problem because you have to start with interplanetary ships in your own system which also need anti-meteor lasers. All your ships probably have some sort of IFF friend or foe signals but you still have to worry about those breaking or getting jammed so you’d always want a backup in the targeting system itself that knew some characteristics ships had and meteors had which the other generally does not and won’t shoot without an override command if an object is clearly not a meteor. It is very hard not to realize a spaceship is a spaceship and not a meteor, and you ought to be able to tell a machine how to figure out which is which. Common sense methods besides shape include it emitting radiation, like radio waves and infrared heat, and moving at the wrong speed for random objects. If you can’t do that maybe you should delay interstellar travel until you can, but it’s not rocket science to recognize a rocket ship. Well, I mean it kind of is rocket science or implies you know rocket science anyway, bad analogy. 

**[00:25:25](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h25m25s)**  Again intelligence can recognize intelligence. Two ships in deep space that see each other and see that their point of departure is the other guy’s point of arrival are probably going to want to heave to and talk and they will want to start doing so long before they pass each other, in large part because they know if they don’t start by then the other guy is going to seriously consider opening fire on them or using whatever rock they planned to refuel at anyway as the gas station and hardware store to cannon up and chase you back to their home, where there will probably be a big fleet waiting to beat you up since they probably will get the message you are coming years before your ship arrives. 

**[00:26:03](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h26m03s)**  So you probably do decelerate and either both settle onto one icy rock somewhere between your ships or each your own some reasonable distance apart so you can chat by radio. There will plenty of these, interstellar space is huge and mostly empty but there are still tons of icy rocks in it, even big ones, that’s why they need the lasers and thrusters. The rock is fuel by the way, or rather the ice is, interstellar ships either run on hydrogen or one of its isotopes or can if they need to, unless it’s a fission rocket in which case you will be able to tell it is and you won’t regard that as a huge threat, even if that’s what you’ve got, and neither of you is stopping or turning around. Instead you’re both expecting to arrive at inhabited systems at the total mercy of its inhabitants, so exchanging a lot of radio talk between ships while you can is a good idea. 

**[00:26:56](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h26m56s)**  These will be a lot shorter and faster than exchanging signals between planets hundreds or thousands of light years apart. That’s our next category and kind of the classic SETI case. There’s not much to say about this. There’s really no contact here either because you can’t ask questions, you send big blocks of data, probably constantly, or receive it, and you’ve got all the time in the world to decipher them because spending a few years doing so barely adds to the time lag. You’d mostly have to decide if you wanted to reply right away or not, if you decide to do so they obvious method is to just repeat their signal back to them, probably with a follow up or minor modification like flipping all the digits so it was definitely a transmission not a reflection. That tells them that you are interested in talking but don’t know how yet, so they will keep their eyes open figuring you are trying to decipher their language. 

**[00:27:47](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h27m47s)**  Of course they won’t get even that mirror reply till twice as long as the distance between you, send a message to a planet a hundred light years away and don’t expect any reply for at least 200 years. You’d also guess they might not immediately reply even with a mirror transmission so it’s a good idea to watch for a while once the minimum time has passed. You should also start listening sooner too in case they have some outpost nearer to you that replied sooner. Now we always have to consider the option they’ve figured out faster than light communication, I sincerely doubt we will ever figure that one out but if we did it is like the last case in terms of distance only. You need to communicate more real-time, which opens the door for accidents, and you’re not safe either. The ability to communicate FTL implies the ability to send matter or energy that way too. Not necessarily a lot of matter either, transmitting a small biological virus or nanomachine that can replicate is all you need to do. The latter can just grey goo a planet or build its own FTL communicator home and build an army on site. Or maybe they can just send a huge energy beam that way. Interesting invasion technique too, if the communicator has to be built on the other side to send anything, you transmit the blueprints to build an FTL radio by classic radio and when someone picks up to say hi, out pops your invasion and colonization crews. Our next option is that we visit them and make contact. That implies we are the more technologically advanced or if not that they are a Stay-at-Home Civilization, something we discussed last month. For the latter your big concern is how they view visitors, and uninvited visitors at that, considering a technologically advanced species shouldn’t be first contacted in person that way. You might dispatch a ship right behind your own first communications to expedite dialogue but it should get there later than the message and that message presumably included telling them you were sending a ship which would turn back if they asked it to. 

**[00:29:54](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h29m54s)**  As to a non-advanced species, like us contacting ourselves back in antiquity, we have the option of either just landing and saying hi or going through the various anthropological options we discussed earlier. Alien biology not being compatible with our own, in all likelihood, we would not just want to land and get out, exposing us and them to all our germs and theirs. I’d survey from above for signs of intelligence, those can be visible from orbit like pyramids or canals. After observing what we can from low orbit telescopes I’d drop drones far away from any signs of civilization and do some observing, even if just to find out what sort of local fauna there is and how it behaves so I can send more drones concealed as those for close observation. Why are doing this? Because we have all the cards and so also have an obligation to come in with a good amount of knowledge so we don’t mess up. An obligation big enough to justify what I regard as committing a fairly serious crime of invading those people’s privacy. I’m going to be wanting to learn the languages and customs so I know how to apologize and compensate those folks for spying on them, which is another reason I wouldn’t approve of prolonged observations that took generations. 

**[00:31:11](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h31m11s)**  A lot of science fiction encourages us to respect primitive alien cultures and not interfere with them, I understand the logic and partially agree, but I’ve never quite understood the logic behind it being okay to spy on them. I justify it by trying to learn as much as we can quickly so we can talk to them as equals, just ones who have less technology, something we can offer to show them and teach them to improve their lives. Spying on people just to satisfy your curiosity about them is a very dubious ethical position. Were it a totally safe one it would mean reading people’s emails was just fine so long as you didn’t get caught and they never found out. When encountering the unknown you have a certain obligation, to both your people and that unknown, to be decently well-prepared. That justifies some limited spying because it reduces the risk to all parties, but it doesn’t just make it okay either. The obligation is greater on you because you have more tools and knowledge on your side. Same reason if you’re a doctor present at an accident you’re the one expected to try to fix the injured people, and why it’s okay to dig through their wallet or cellphone to see if they’ve got any existing conditions that might be relevant. This is also why even if you don’t think you are likely to encounter any aliens with some colony ship you send out you still have an obligation to have designed a first contact protocol and made sure the captain knows of it, even if it is just knowing one exists and the name of the file. For our next case we have the example of meeting people through a third party. We already met some aliens and we asked them if they knew any others. If they say yes then we ought to ask them for the relevant information like languages and protocols. In the 1990s Scifi TV series Babylon 5 we get an example of a first contact situation that went bad, ending with us firing on alien ships, the Minbari, and killing their leader. This leads to them trying to commit genocide against us. The details were left vague till some years later when they did a made-for-TV movie on it and they fill in the blanks, badly too. We get details on them from another race and later on yet another race has an ambassador who fatally obliterates the plot by casually offering to help negotiate at a secret summit since he is fluent in both Human and Minbari Languages. Up until that moment there was at least a vague hope that prior contact of everyone involved hadn’t involved communication. I’ll skip the details but the entire incident occurs because of neither side, including the one who has been spacefaring and in contact with aliens for at least a thousand years, having any language files for other species who both have come into contact with. There’s blame to spread around but it mostly falls on the alien Minbari here, since they had the advantages. This applies to their actions afterwards too, since when you know you have the tech and firepower edge and you know they knew it too, you should guess that if they shot at you and ran away they probably were spooked into doing it, not trying to provoke a conflict they’d know they’d lose. 

**[00:34:22](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h34m22s)**  This brings us to our last case, where the aliens come and visit us. 

**[00:34:26](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h34m26s)**  It is quite common in fiction to have the aliens do something that spooks human into some response then afterwards condemns our rash actions. There’s an episode of the Outer Limits, the 1990’s incarnation, titled “Trial by Fire” where a newly sworn in president has to deal with an approaching object traveling at half the speed of light. 

**[00:34:46](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h34m46s)**  This object barely misses Earth and crashes into the moon instead, needless to say doing huge amounts of damage. After a moment of celebration at this narrowly avoided doom the astronomers inform the president that they’ve detected a fleet of alien ships. 

**[00:35:00](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h35m00s)**  They also hit one of our satellites with an energy pulse that disables it. Bad clichés ensue. The scientists argue the pulse disabling the satellite was probably an accident, the president’s wife tries to convince him of the alien peaceful intent. The generals encourage him to assume it is an invasion and nuke them. The aliens are repeating a signal we can’t translate. The scientists realize that the object that hit the moon was an infinite power source and argue it was meant to be a gift, not a weapon. 

**[00:35:27](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h35m27s)**  The president transmits a message welcoming the aliens to Earth but insisting they stay in Orbit for the time being. One of the ships lands in the ocean anyway, gets fired on by the Russians, and it destroys the ships. We deploy a nuke against the alien fleet, it fails and they launch two objects at Moscow and DC. Just before those arrive they translate the message finally, realizing it was in English all along but distorted by the aliens speaking inside water, and it says “Let us be your friends”, the president and his wife mournfully embrace before being incinerated. I’m not quite sure what the moral of the story is, but if an Earth Fleet did that and their commander came back telling me about it I’d have the incompetent fool shot. The moral of the story is supposed to be that we screwed up and provoked the aliens, in reality the aliens were absolute morons. They understand English, meaning they were listening to our radio signals, meaning they know exactly how we communicate. They would know which bands of radio to transmit on and exactly how much power to send that transmission with so that their message, in perfectly understandable English, would show up on everyone’s TVs and radios. 

**[00:36:34](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h36m34s)**  That’s the big take away for First Contact, one side is almost always at a knowledge advantage. 

**[00:36:41](https://youtube.com/watch?v=igZi4iyJiq0&t=00h36m41s)**  No ship has any business arriving here without already knowing our language because we’ve been sending it out for decades and they should have spent decades listening to it on the way here and deciphering it. Honestly even if their computers are no better than ours are now they ought not need long to figure it out with the sheer quantity of signals we’ve produced in the last century. So anyone coming here should know our language already. This is one of the reasons, the other being time, that we’re not doing alien languages today, only for the example of two ships running into each other in deep space – which is frankly highly improbable – should you ever have a case where one of the parties hadn’t had plenty of time to learn and get comfortable with the language first. We could, and probably will, do an episode on deciphering alien signals or how we should send our own, but in short form its all math and physics, because those are the only guaranteed shared concepts of technological civilizations. If they come from our own universe anyway, folks dialing us up from some higher dimension where they don’t have gravity or stars or even atoms might be a different story. Something we’ll discuss another time. For now the key concept is that in all probability first contact will always occur twice, the first time when Species A finds out B exists and spends time deciphering their language, and the second time when B finds out A exists because Species A sends them a formal greeting in their own language. We’ve still got tons of stuff to cover but that will finish us up for the day. Next week we will be looking at Weather Control and GeoEngineering concepts, essentially how to Terraform our own planet. The week after that we’ll return to the Alien Civilizations series to look at Crazy Aliens, and unlike last week’s episode on stupid aliens, this time we won’t be look at our misconceptions from fiction but instead how actual aliens might have behaviors we’d view as nuts or vice-versa. This will be our first attempt to genuinely look inside a hypothetical alien mind. A couple quick announcements before we end for the day. First, all the episodes come with captions as you know, but mostly in English, we’ve had volunteers who have kindly translated many of the episodes into other languages, and I want to thank them, but we’re always looking for more and if you’re bilingual and interested in trying your hand at one, let me know in the comments below where I’ll also leave some explanations pinned at the top of the comments secion. Second, since I haven’t announced it in a while, all episodes are also available for free audio download over on soundcloud, and I always include a link to those in the episode description. Some folks prefer to listen to these when driving and I try to accommodate that. I always post two versions, one with music and one without. Okay, announcements complete, again next week is Weather Control and GeoEngineering. To get alerts when that and other episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel. If you enjoyed this episode, make sure to like it and share it with others. Until next time, thanks for watching, and have a great week! 





