
---


---

Habitable Planets, Vol II: Tidally Locked Worlds
---
  
2015-07-30  
https://youtu.be/K7OloPuLMpA  

---

Last time we talked about life on planets very far from their stars, like Pluto. This time we’ll be looking at life very close to stars instead. Now that can mean two different types of planets, ones which are very hot because they’re very near a star, like Mercury, or ones that aren’t hot because their sun is very dim. We’ll look at the first case, hot or Cthonian planets, another time. In that latter case the worlds have to be so close to their sun that they could become tidally locked to it, so one side always got sunlight and the other never did. The biggest factor in Tidal Locking is how close the object is to the thing it is orbiting and planets around red dwarves have to be very close to be warm enough to be classically habitable. These worlds, sometimes called Twilight Worlds or Eyeball Earths, will be our focus for today. Incidentally if you’re not too familiar with tidal locking you may wish to pause this video and click the link to short Tidal Locking companion video I did for this. It explains what Tidal Locking is, how and why it happens, and why we think planets near red dwarf stars would tend to be tidally locked. 

**[00:01:16](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h01m16s)**  Also incidentally, if you’re newer to my videos and have a hard time understanding me, you should turn on the closed captions for the video which ought to help. I’ve got a bit of a speech impediment. As I’m sure you’ve noticed. 

**[00:01:29](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h01m29s)**  So you have a tidally locked planet. This tends to get envisioned as desert on the sun side, dark ice on the night side, and a thin habitable area around the rim lit by twilight. 

**[00:01:40](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h01m40s)**  Hence the name, twilight worlds. The whole light side lit by a tiny glowing red star. 

**[00:01:46](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h01m46s)**  But how accurate is that notion? Like a lot of things seen in science fiction, accuracy is a bit hit and miss. First we don’t know that all, or even most, worlds near red dwarves would be tidally locked. Red Dwarves are the supermajority of stars in the Universe and cover a pretty broad range, from ones more than half as massive as our sun to ones less than a tenth of its mass. That’s a far wider proportional variation in mass than most of the stellar types and on the more massive end we wouldn’t expect habitable worlds to be tidally locked. More over, atmospheres and oceans, as well as moons, can impede the tidal locking process. Again we discuss that in the companion video. 

**[00:02:28](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h02m28s)**  So the bigger red dwarves can have habitable worlds with orbits that take 2 or 3 months, while the smallest it can be two or three days. For these smaller ones tidal locking is a lot more plausible since not only is distance the biggest factor in tidal locking but also because it’s hard to have a big moon on a planet so close to a star that might destabilize its orbit. The other big misconception, or partial misconception, is the appearance of that star to those living on the planet. First, while these stars are smaller, they are way, way closer so they look much bigger in the sky than our own sun does. They would seem to be giant blobs in the sky. Second, while they would look red from twilight band for the same reason our sun looks red at twilight, red dwarves aren’t really red. Our color classification system for stars was a very early and loose system that’s just stuck around. All stars look white. Our own ‘yellow’ sun, which is actually green, or emits its peak wavelength in green light, is fundamentally white. It is too bright in too many frequencies to have a color. Red dwarves have their own peak frequency in the red range of the spectrum, but so do incandescent light bulbs. On any tidal locked world, red dwarf or white supergiant, the sun will look red from the twilight band because of all the air it passes through acting like a prism in what’s called Rayleigh Scattering. 

**[00:03:52](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h03m52s)**  Everywhere else you see it on a world with an Earth-like atmosphere – and most other types you might expect – the sky will look blue and the sun will be big white glowing orb. The exception would be a habitable world around a red giant because those are simply so big and dim the sun would just blanket the sky in red light rather than being a dense bright object. For most stars though the sun and sky on most of the planet will look more or less like our own does and it’s the atmosphere’s makeup that would have the big effect on color, and will vary a lot just as our own does with time of day and weather. Mars’ has at times a bluish-grey sky, a red one, and a butterscotch one. [show curiosity pics] Now what do we mean by this twilight band? 

**[00:04:35](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h04m35s)**  How wide is it? Is it the only place life can be? Is one side really desert and the other massive sheet of ice miles deep? And the answer in all those cases is a mix of maybe and depends. We imagine them as deserts on the sun side because if the light is always shining down on one spot, growing a bit weaker as you get away from latitude and longitude zero, you ought to have a constant wind emanating out pushing moisture away and never carrying it back, until it deposits on the dark side in an ever thickening sheet till at last there’s no water anywhere except on a very thin band around the rim. 

**[00:05:10](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h05m10s)**  However, tidally locked objects do sort of squirm around. We say our own moon only shows us one face all the time, so we see half of it, but that’s not quite true. Libration, an effect of the eccentricity of orbits and of things not being point-like objects, makes slightly more than half of a tidally locked object visible to the object it’s locked to. We can see about 59% of the moon’s surface over the course of a month, not 50%. For a tidally locked planet with similar libration, this would mean the sun will actually dip over and under the horizon in some places of the twilight band. 

**[00:05:44](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h05m44s)**  And again most habitable zone planets around red dwarves have planetary years lasting a few days to a few months, with the ones most likely to be tidally locked on the shorter end of that. So you’d have spots, for the smaller dwarves, where the sun dipped over and under the horizon every few days, or on a weekly cycle. For them it’s a yearly cycle since they have a very short year and their day is exactly as long as their year, but we’ll try to keep this in comfortable Earth units when we can hopefully without causing confusion. And that short year has another effect, because while our own seasons have to do with our axial tilt, the Earth does get more or less light when it is closer or father from the sun. Amusingly, at least for those of us in the northern hemisphere, the Earth is closest to the sun not long after winter solstice in January and furthest in July. That’s pure coincidence, but it does mean Earth gets about 7% more light in January than in July, and Earth has a very low orbital eccentricity. 

**[00:06:46](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h06m46s)**  Mercury, the one closest to the sun, has the most eccentricity of any planet, and it get more than twice as much sunlight when closest to the sun than it does when furthest away. 

**[00:06:58](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h06m58s)**  So a tidally locked world with a decent eccentricity might experience seasons, on say a two week orbit, where the eternal days cooled or warmed rather noticeably. That effect could easily result in weather moving moisture around in peculiar ways. 

**[00:07:13](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h07m13s)**  Next there’s the dark side. It’s worth remembering that Antarctica is hardly lifeless even in the places where its dark six months out of the year and we’ve found life buried under the ice down there. Tidally locked planets don’t start tidally locked and as we discussed with Pluto, where we do suspect there are oceans under the ice there, or Jupiter’s moon Europa, you can have liquid water where you wouldn’t expect it to be. There’s hundreds of lakes buried under the ice in Antarctica. So we don’t want to write off even the dark sides of these worlds as utterly barren and sterile. 

**[00:07:45](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h07m45s)**  You’ve got this massive miles deep block of ice there, constantly melting on the sides and having snow come from the sun side adding back to it. But that’s not the only cause of melting. Ice has weight, and that means pressure, and that also means sideways motion. 

**[00:08:02](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h08m02s)**  If you’re familiar with Game of Thrones, where they have this giant wall made of ice and gravel, you might have heard people mention that it ought to be way wider at the bottom and that the bottom should expand as it gets taller and melt more near the bottom. Obviously that is supposed to be a somewhat magic wall and it’s a fantasy novel but when the laws of physics apply a giant ice cube is going to squish down, get wider at the bottom, and melt in the lower layers so the water isn’t going to stay totally trapped there and depending on how much water the world has you get a thin world-spanning ocean at the rim with icebergs constantly snapping off into it. Also, oceans transport heat around too, so they could expand this habitable band quite a bit. 

**[00:08:44](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h08m44s)**  Taken as a whole, these twilight worlds with their thin habitable bands might be a lot wider than we used to think. So wide that twilight band might not be properly descriptive for some and the term ‘Eyeball Earth’ might be more apt. 

**[00:08:59](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h08m59s)**  So could we colonize such a world? Yeah, sure, on the grand list of screwed up planets with weird conditions these sorts are a heck of a lot easier to terraform than most we’ll discuss, for a given value of the world terraform, and probably easier than some place like Mars or Venus. Adapting plants to perpetual daylight is probably feasible, and most plants only use a smaller fraction of the light that hits them at noon anyway so eternal twilight isn’t a big deal. It wouldn’t seem very dark to us either, your eyes are logarithmic in their sensitivity which is why your light bulbs in your home seem perfectly bright at night time but during the day with the windows open, even though only a small fraction of sunlight gets in those windows, you’d barely notice the lights were on. Most house lights illuminate a room at about one thousandth the brightness of the noon time sun, around as bright as the sun on Pluto, so a twilight area of tidally locked world isn’t going to seem dim to you anyway. It will be red from all the air, and the water will be a lot darker, but by and large it will be fairly unexceptional from our point of view. 

**[00:10:05](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h10m05s)**  Plus, as we mentioned in the video on Pluto, you can always use orbital mirrors, thin light-weight ones, to light the darkside up and shades the sunny side. You could even institute a normal Earth 24 hour day night cycle if you were ambitious. After all a thin mirror can be shiny on one side and opaque on the other and you can make the thing tilt parallel or perpendicular to a star and twist their direction as needed. All things being equal, a tidally locked world is probably the easiest kind to terraform closest to Earth’s own conditions. 

**[00:10:36](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h10m36s)**  Now how about life evolving there in the first place? Well there’s some challenges there. 

**[00:10:42](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h10m42s)**  First off, life, at least any life based off normal chemistry even if it isn’t our style, doesn’t handle UV and X-ray radiation well and red dwarves do give that off, especially when they’re younger. You need a magnetosphere to protect that life. Very thick atmospheres or life living under water helps but for classic land life you really do need that magnetic solar shield. We get ours on Earth from a giant molten metal core spinning around. Tidally locked worlds do rotate, their day and their year are the same but they do spin. Ganymede, Jupiter’s largest moon and the largest moon in the solar system, actually bigger than the planet Mercury, is tidally locked to Jupiter and does have a powerful magnetosphere. As I recall it’s the only moon with a strong one and it’s still so weak that Jupiter’s own field dominates it at that distance. Without that magnetosphere, a planet is not just going to have life on it irradiated, but could get its whole atmosphere stripped off by the charged particles its sun deluges it with. Realistically they don’t just need a magnetic field nearly as strong as Earths, they need one decently stronger because red dwarves are fairly unstable as stars go and can really oscillate their radiation a lot. 

**[00:11:54](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h11m54s)**  On the terraforming end, that’s not a barrier that can’t be overcome. You can simulate a magnetosphere by having big solar powered magnets orbiting the planet just like you can do orbital mirrors. On the natural life end though, that is a worry, air protects from ionizing radiation and our twilight bands will have a lot of air protecting them, that’s why the twilights here on Earth are red, light has to pass through far more air at twilight than at noon. And again the world could have a natural magnetosphere of great strength but while that’s not entirely dependent on rotational speed of a planet, and tidally lock worlds still rotate, once a year which for them might be only a few days or weeks, it doesn’t help matters having less rotation. 

**[00:12:37](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h12m37s)**  Another consideration is collision. Red Dwarves aren’t all that much less massive than our own sun, even if they are way dimmer, so they could have fairly massive collections of planets like we do. Those planets might be more densely packed, but they also ought to have a lot of comets, and since they are dimmer these won’t evaporate nearly as quickly. There's good odds we owe our own oceans and atmosphere in large part to getting whacked with tons of comets. This is probably a bigger threat to life-bearing worlds around a red dwarf since there could be a lot more comets hitting the thing and more gravitational perturbations by the other planets knocking things into collision orbits and collisions are going to be more common anyway since things are packed in a bit tighter. Circumstances depending, that could be a benefit or hindrance to life evolving there. 

**[00:13:24](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h13m24s)**  We don’t know for sure how most of these factors add up as pros or cons since we don’t exactly have a plethora of life-bearing worlds to examine or accurate models of how durable life is, but that aspect alone might make red dwarf worlds barren and sterile. Or it might not, in this videos, unlike the Fermi Paradox videos, we take a more optimistic approach to where life might show up. The other good news is we probably won’t have to wait terribly long to learn more about such planets, in our hunt for exoplanets worlds close enough to be tidally locked are among the easier kind to detect. 

**[00:13:59](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h13m59s)**  In that optimistic regard, tidally locked worlds around red dwarf stars look like pretty good candidates not just for simple life, as we discussed with Pluto, but complex life too. And as science has rolled on we’ve found a lot more positives, and negatives, for these kind of worlds hosting life, more than we can cover here today and we just do know yet. But fundamentally, while most of the planet isn’t very habitable for large land animals like us, probably about 5-20% would be, and even if that area was mostly ocean like Earth is that’s still a large continent worth of land. Probably enough to support a lot of biodiversity and the numbers needed to be putting together a technological civilization from hunter-gatherer levels. So Twilight worlds get the stamp of ‘plausible’ for possible home worlds of intelligent life. 

**[00:14:51](https://youtube.com/watch?v=K7OloPuLMpA&t=00h14m51s)**  That’s it for today. If you’ve enjoyed the video hit the like button and try some of the other videos, and don’t forget to hit the subscribe button to be alerted when new videos some out. Thanks for watching, and have a great day! 





