
---


---

Habitable Planets 4: Life on Rogue Planets
---
  
2015-11-28  
https://youtu.be/gOu3zGfP-TQ  

---

So today we’ll be continuing our Habitable Planets series with a discussion of Rogue Planets. If you’ve just jumped into the series by starting with this video, you might want to go back and see the first one on Dwarf Planets before watching this as much of the material in that video relates to this one. 

**[00:00:28](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h00m28s)**  Also, like all the links that will pop up in these videos with the yellow or white boxes around them, you can just click on it and it will pause this video and open that one in a new window. Similarly if you’re new to the channel you should probably turn on the closed captions, I’m easier to understand with subtitles on. 

**[00:00:44](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h00m44s)**  So, let’s begin with the obvious… what is a Rogue Planet? 

**[00:00:48](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h00m48s)**  In a nutshell Rogue Planets are objects that were either ejected from their native solar system or formed entirely in interstellar space, so technically they’re not planets at all. That’s not new for this series though, we started by looking at dwarf planets like Pluto, and last time we looked at large moons. Only one of our videos in this series has actually revolved around a classic planet. And that will continue to be the norm for this series because, to put it simply, regular old planets around regular old suns is terribly boring. Now it has been over a century and a half since Darwin published and we still don’t know how abiogenesis originally occurred. 

**[00:01:28](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h01m28s)**  The leading scientific candidates are hydrothermal vents, tidal pools, and panspermia in basically that order but we don’t really know because we can’t see the process in action and unsurprisingly it is rather tricky to hunt for evidence from billions of years ago. Truth be told, all three of those options might allow abiogenesis or none of them might and we need a new theory. 

**[00:01:49](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h01m49s)**  But it does seem plausible that however it occurred here on Earth it probably can occur on planets a lot like our own around stars a lot like our own. Similarly, if you’ve watched the Terraforming video, you know that colonizing any planet is a major undertaking but the more like Earth it is the easier it is. So looking at how life might originate on Earth-like planets or how we might colonize them just isn’t all that interesting. 

**[00:02:14](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h02m14s)**  In this series we’re interested in the hard cases, the abnormalities. The places that don’t seem like life could occur on them or wouldn’t seem like places we’d want to make our home. Rogue Planets at first glance are a practically the epitome of that. Icy cold worlds without a speck of sunlight, totally inhospitable to life. But on second glance, they might be a lot more hospitable than they initially look, both as a source of life, and as a place we might want to colonize. Indeed for the latter, for colonization, as we’ll see in the upcoming Interstellar Colonization video, they may be the most valuable real estate around and the keystone of us getting out among the stars. Another thing to keep in mind is that Rogue Planet is a very broad territory. When we use it, we’re not really talking about Earth-sized objects, which are a narrow and special though interesting case we’ll look at sometimes called Steppenwolf Planets. We really mean just about anything from a decent sized asteroid up to gas giant bigger than Jupiter that might have its own moon. 

**[00:03:15](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h03m15s)**  Essentially we mean any object out in the interstellar void, and that’s a big category, tons of things would fall within it with nothing more in common than being decently large and devoid of sunlight. Once you get away from a sun’s light, the energy to power life has to come from something else. And life needs a power source. Now back in the first video, when discussing Pluto, we pointed out a couple of these, as well as some alternative chemistries life might use besides how we do it on Earth. 

**[00:03:44](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h03m44s)**  For power we have Tidal heating from a moon, and rogue planets can have moons, they could acquire some while wandering out of their solar system or picking one up in deep space, and they have decent odds of keeping their original one too. Tidal heating can be a very powerful energy source especially when not eclipsed by sunlight. 

**[00:04:01](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h04m01s)**  Nuclear isotopes like uranium down in the core of a world providing heat is an option. 

**[00:04:05](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h04m05s)**  Gravitational contraction generating heat is too, for larger objects like Gas Giants. 

**[00:04:11](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h04m11s)**  None of these provide much power though, and that matters because even though you could have a warm planet far from a sun, it doesn’t necessarily mean there’s power for life. 

**[00:04:20](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h04m20s)**  Life can’t thrive just because a place is warm, it needs incoming energy. There’s life that lives in subterranean caverns here on Earth for instance, but it’s very diffuse, way less biomass than the surface has, usually slow metabolism creatures and plants too. 

**[00:04:36](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h04m36s)**  Unexposed to the sun, such life has to live mostly off the waste of the solar-powered ecosystems above or the trickles of energy available from things like thermal vents or chemicals which it can metabolize for energy. Photosynthesis is the way we get really dense life, and that’s mostly off the table for Rogue Planets. I say mostly, not entirely, because objects do give off photons at a rate and wavelength connected to their temperature and we have found not only organisms that live off the heat and chemicals coming out of hydrothermal vents but also some organisms, like some types of Green Sulfur Bacteria, that can live of the light too. Infrared light, especially the Mid-IR range often known as thermal light, is not going to give you super-abundant growth either but it does add one more power source to our pool. Energy available for life does need to be a steady source, and the more the better. But even on a decent-sized asteroid you could have chunks of uranium in the core decaying and giving off heat that emerged from cracks into pockets of mineral rich water and that’s basically the same condition that you have for Earth’s own ocean smokers that are the lead candidate for abiogenesis of life on Earth. Ditto, as I mentioned, there wouldn’t be anything strange about two rogues being in orbit of each other and giving us tidal heating, as we discussed in the video on tidal locking. You could also have pockets of radioactive material right inside or near our underground pockets of mineral rich water acting as natural nuclear fission reactors, we’ve seen this even on earth. Groundwater seeps into places with dense uranium deposits and acts as a neutron moderator, just as in our own fission plants, increasing power output of those deposits beyond natural decay. 

**[00:06:18](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h06m18s)**  You could never really expect these methods to produce abundant life and rich ecosystems comparable to what normal photosynthesis powered ecosystems here on Earth have, so probably no chance for large quantities of complex animals that might develop into a technological civilization, but it does appear possible you could have life naturally occur on them. 

**[00:06:22](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h06m22s)**  Now the next to keep in mind, looking at rogue planets, is they probably wouldn’t be large rocks in the void. Earth has very little hydrogen and helium, and even other gases are pretty thin and rare, because the sun strips atmospheres off planets as we discussed in the Terraforming video. There is ionizing radiation in deep space, but not much of it, and no regular light to warm the planet’s surface to make atmosphere stripping easier. 

**[00:06:43](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h06m43s)**  So any object in the void is likely to acquire a lot of interstellar gas. If you’ve got miles deep layers of hydrogen and helium surrounding your world that makes for one heck of an insulating blanket and strongly implies the possibility of oceans on those rogue planets. 

**[00:06:58](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h06m58s)**  Just taking the example of a rogue gas giant with moons, like Titan and Europa, places we already consider possible candidates for life, very little of their mechanics rely on the sun. Titan has a thick nitrogen atmosphere also strong in methane that’s warmed largely by rotating around Saturn, Europa is a large ocean crusted over with ice that’s also tidally heated by Jupiter. If life could evolve on either, then it could evolve on parallel worlds in the interstellar void just as easily. What about Earth-like planets? 

**[00:07:30](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h07m30s)**  In fact let’s consider what would happen if Earth and its moon were ejected from our solar system. Needless to say such an ejection combined with the loss of light would kill nearly all, if not all, life on Earth. Though it would take a long time for some of it to die and some might not die at all. There’s a lot of heat on Earth and the cooler you get, the slower you radiate heat away. What’s more as the planet cools the oceans freeze over and begin making an insulating blanket that traps heat in the deep ocean. By that point all the water is frozen on the surface but the air is still around, nitrogen and oxygen don’t liquefy till you get a good bit colder. But under the ice sheet all the heat trapped in the core and mantle of the planet from years past and that which is still being produced by radioactive materials in the core are keeping the deep oceans warm and leaking out through warmer hydrothermal vents where life will continue. We’d also still be getting tidal heating off our own moon to further warm things and stir the pot. Now eventually that atmosphere will liquefy too, the heat produced by our planet’s core is only around a three-thousandth of what we get from the sun and keeping in mind that fourth-power rule of heat radiation we’d expect the temp to drop to about the fourth power of three thousand less than now. Which is about 7 or 8 times cooler, somewhere around 40 Kelvin which is cold enough for nitrogen and oxygen and argon to liquefy but not quite cold enough for hydrogen to liquefy. Pretty close but not quite, and helium takes even far lower temperatures. 

**[00:08:57](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h08m57s)**  So as Earth drifted out into the void we’d start collecting hydrogen and helium gas as a new atmosphere, very slowly but it would begin to accumulate and we’d also nab us some comets and other stuff. If we get enough it might even create high enough pressures and temperatures under that new atmosphere to turn the nitrogen and oxygen back into air. So you’ve got a water ocean under the ice, and possibly a second ocean of liquid oxygen and nitrogen on top of that, and an increasingly thick hydrogen and helium atmosphere over that. Planets significantly bigger than Earth will be even warmer, while smaller ones will be colder, but we’d expect just about any object large enough to get dubbed a planet to act this way. 

**[00:09:36](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h09m36s)**  These sorts of worlds are sometimes known as Steppenwolf Planets, or Steppenworlds, for their comparison to a lone wolf, and would specifically be any planets with a mass from a little less than a third of Earth’s to a little over triple Earth’s mass. These planets would have an insulating layer of ice and carbon dioxide snow and whatever else they picked up touring the lonely void to allow sub-surface liquid oceans heated by geothermal activity coming up through hydrothermal vents. 

**[00:10:05](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h10m05s)**  Now we can’t be sure of Steppenwolf planets – which are rogue planets with subsurface oceans – because we can’t really predict too well how thick that ice would end up being on a given planet. Ice will grow from the surface down until it reaches equilibrium with the heat coming from the mantle, but that is going to vary a lot from world to world and our best guess is for Earth it would be nearly a kilometer deep, for smaller worlds it could be several miles and the dynamic gets further messed up if depending on whether most of heat transport is occurring by convection or conduction. 

**[00:10:38](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h10m38s)**  These Steppenwolf Planets are our main interest today because life on smaller planets, essentially icy dwarfs or asteroids, is another subject we’ve already partially addressed or wouldn’t be much different in the case of an asteroid from it being in our own belt or in deep space. 

**[00:10:53](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h10m53s)**  Ditto Gas Giants themselves, rather than their moons, will be looked at later in the series. 

**[00:10:58](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h10m58s)**  There’s pretty good odds Steppenwolf planets decently larger than Earth would have deeper oceans, and would actually get more radioactive heating. After all, a planet of similar makeup and density to Earth but, say, twice as massive would have twice the radioactive heating and twice the water but only 60% more surface area for that water to be on and for heat to escape from. Super-Earth Steppenwolf planets might be able to support fairly robust underwater ecosystems, albeit rather anemic compared to our own ocean life, even the deep sea life which on Earth gains a second power source from organic matter sinking down from higher levels that are fed by sunlight. And there might be a lot of these worlds, some estimates right now place the number of rogue planets, objects ranging from as small bigger moons like Europa and Titan, up to Super-Jupiters, may number around 100,000 per every star. Meaning there’d be more a lot more of them then objects of a similar size in our own solar system which is only in the area of around a hundred, not a hundred thousand. This doesn’t even include smaller objects, like asteroids, which we might expect to be even more common. But if for the moment we assumed this estimate was right and those were fairly evenly distributed in space, these object would only be spaced a few light weeks apart. A long cry from the light hours spacing of our on mid to outer solar system, but a lot closer than the few light years between other solar systems. Now if you start tossing in asteroids, well there around a million asteroids a mile across or bigger just in our asteroid belt, more than a thousand times as common as the various planets and larger moons we have, and if that ratio held up you’d expect interstellar space, where planets might be common enough to appear every few light weeks, to be as common as every light day or two. 

**[00:12:52](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h12m52s)**  We’ll talk more about making rocks like that livable in the future, though if you saw the video on Fusion you can take a guess as to how, but this will be an important point when we get to the Interstellar Colonization video since it means solar systems are not lonely islands in space years away from the nearest neighbor but really more like cities dotting a vast perpetual plain of rural land. Now getting back to Steppenwolf Planets, the ones of a mass and internal composition fairly close to Earth, we’ve seen that they aren’t too bad of places for life to maybe emerge on, but like we’ve discussed in the case of Pluto, not places you’d expect life to be abundant on if it exists at all. 

**[00:13:31](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h13m31s)**  How could we change that? 

**[00:13:34](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h13m34s)**  How would we colonize a place like that? 

**[00:13:37](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h13m37s)**  Well again if you’ve seen the fusion video you know we’d have the option to just manually light the place. I mentioned in that video that to light a square mile of land artificially like Earth terrain normally gets would require around 10^16 Joules a year or about ten kilograms of fusion fuel – hydrogen or deuterium, both of which are quite common in deep space. 

**[00:14:01](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h14m01s)**  To light an entire planet the size of Earth as well as our sun does, to fake a sun, would require a lot more juice, something like five or six megatons of fusion fuel a year. Which sounds like a lot, but for comparison, if that planet had a hydrogen atmosphere of the same mass as Earth’s, which is about 5 billion megatons of air, then you’d have a billion year supply just from that. Not to mention all the hydrogen in the oceans, and our ocean is roughly a thousand times more massive than our atmosphere. So if we stuck a fake sun in orbit around the world, say, orbiting every 24 hours and shining down in a beam like a flashlight, sort of like a geocentric model where the sun orbits the planet, you could run that as long as a normal star lived, and a normal planet lived, without putting a very big dent in your local supply of fuel. 

**[00:14:52](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h14m52s)**  Of course if you’re colonizing a Steppenwolf Planet you might not want to go that route. 

**[00:14:57](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h14m57s)**  You might instead decide to keep it frozen and just stick some submersible fusion plants in the ocean, trailing strings of lights, and introducing photosynthetic organisms into it. You could even do something like this on Earth, if you wanted the great ocean depths to have more life in them. Just stick a floating fusion plant somewhere and flush all the cooling water down along pipes with photosynthetic optimized LED lights running down far beneath the sun’s reach. Especially if you added in some meshes to collect minerals and detritus you could end up with long gorgeous vertical coral reefs harboring huge amounts of marine life. Even if the planet already had life, down near the bottom where the hydrothermal vents were, you could attach your cities to the ice up top and slowly melt it till it was just a fairly thin layer of ice a few hundred meters thick. Then in those new upper regions you could attach strings which provided light and aerated the water and introduce earth marine life, the detritus of which could sink to the depths and help fuel the native ecology. Done properly the two could be kept separate and safe while allowing two ecosystems thrive, with the original one now much more robust. 

**[00:16:05](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h16m05s)**  I’m not sure how practical that is compared to other colonization routes, but personally I find the idea of leviathan depths with trailing lights providing an oasis of life pretty neat. 

**[00:16:17](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h16m17s)**  So that’s going to wrap it up for Rogue Planets for now. We’ll look at how the smaller and likely more common Rogue Asteroids might be made habitable in the upcoming video on Rotating Habitats in our Megastructures Series, then talk about the importance of Rogue Planets to interstellar expansion and civilization in the Upcoming video on Interstellar Colonization. 

**[00:16:37](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h16m37s)**  If you want a reminder when those videos come out, click the subscribe button. 

**[00:16:41](https://youtube.com/watch?v=gOu3zGfP-TQ&t=00h16m41s)**  As always, questions and comments are welcome, and if you enjoyed the video hit the like button and share it with others. Thanks for watching, and have a great day! 





