
---


---

Megastructures 09 Nicoll Dyson Beams
---
  
2016-06-17  
https://youtu.be/RjtFnWh53z0  

---

So today’s topic is the Nicoll-Dyson Beam, a great big space gun that can turn a star’s entire solar output into a laser that tears into targets with a destructive power equal to several trillion nuclear bombs a second. So with that in mind we’re going to explain how such a device works, talk a little bit about blowing up planets or even sterilizing whole galaxies, and talk a bit about why you might build such a device and what non-destructive uses it has. And we’ll finish out with some channel updates. 

**[00:00:41](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h00m41s)**  If you’ve already been following along with our discussion of Dyson Spheres, or Dyson Swarms, in the Megatructures Series or the Dyson Dilemma then you know the basics. If not I’ll review them quickly but you might want to click on video link to jump back and watch those first. And as always, if you’re not used to my voice you should turn on the closed caption subtitles down by the subscribe button. 

**[00:01:02](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h01m02s)**  Okay, a Dyson Sphere is a collection of artificial bodies surrounding a sun, theoretically that could be one giant rigid sphere like an inside out planet if you’ve got the magical technologies for cheap transmutation and artificial gravity, but what was originally meant by sphere was basically a cloud or swarm of smaller satellites. These could be power gatherers or artificial rotating habitats like we discussed back in episode 4, and under known science the only way to do a rigid sphere around a star or have components hover in the same place is if they are ultra thin mirrors, called statites, floating over the sun from light pressure like a solar sail or like a sheet of paper hovering over a floor vent. 

**[00:01:39](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h01m39s)**  For our purposes today it doesn’t matter, since on the list of difficult tasks involved in building any Dyson Sphere, rigid or swarm, keeping all those bodies on the right trajectories and not bumping into each other barely makes the list. In fact one of the main uses of a Nicoll-Dyson Beam, or smaller versions of it, is to give objects little taps to get them back on the right path or vaporize dangerous space garbage. 

**[00:02:02](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h02m02s)**  The concept is pretty simple, once you’ve got a bunch of mirrors around a sun you’ve got access to all that power, which is a couple billions times what Earth receives. That gives us the sunlight to light a couple billion more planets, or to push the entire solar system across the galaxy like we discussed last time in the Shkadov Thrusters video, or to use more modest setups to push spaceships up to interstellar speeds or vaporize asteroids and the like. But it also gives you the power to incinerate whole planets around other solar systems. And this is also a pretty cheap thing to build. 

**[00:02:32](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h02m32s)**  Like the Shkadov thruster, when you’re only surrounding your star with thin mirrors even a single large asteroid or moon probably has enough matter to make one. It’s sort of like wrapping your star with tin foil as opposed to hundreds of feet thick dirt and ocean. 

**[00:02:46](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h02m46s)**  Unlike the Shkadov Thruster you do need a big lens to focus that beam if you’re planning to hit Earth-sized targets around other stars, but you can make lenses much larger when you can build them in zero-gravity environments not to mention there being a lot of tricks for making effectively giant lenses from small components. It’s worth remembering after all that a normal glass lens is actually composed of trillions of tiny atoms that are themselves mostly composed of empty space. You can also use a lot of the dynamic support structures we saw through the series starting with orbital rings and space fountains up to shell worlds and discsworlds to make some very giant rigid lenses you can change focal length and direction with. This isn’t a laser or optics video though, so will suffice it to say that you can get that energy lined up into a beam with a very long range. There’s some debate about how long, but as we’ve already discussed you can push on things with mirrors on their back anyway so even if you can’t pinpoint a planet on the other side of the galaxy you can ram a giant mirror missile up to relativistic speeds with some minimal guidance on it to make corrections to its own trajectory and just ram your target for the same effect. And that’s actually the better course of action anyway as we’ll discuss later. Great big laser, simple concept. But how much energy does it actually take to blow up a planet? 

**[00:03:59](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h03m59s)**  We all remember in Star Wars, unless you’ve been living in a cave for the last 40 years, where the Death Star just nukes the Planet Alderaan in one fast shot. You might also have seen movie theories where folks wonder about why when they are going to do the same thing to the Moon of Yavin they have to wait till it is out from behind the gas giant to shoot instead of just blowing up the gas giant planet then shooting the moon. 

**[00:04:20](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h04m20s)**  Now Star Wars aims for scientific accuracy the with a level of marksmanship worse than the storm troopers featured in the films so wondering about that is pretty pointless, but here I actually makes sense. The amount of energy needed to blow up any object big enough to be held together by its own gravity has to exceed what we call gravitational binding energy, or just binding energy. And generally speaking that way more the doubles if you double the mass of a planet, closer to the square of mass. This is one of the reasons why asteroid are much nicer than planets for mining and space construction of megastructures, to extract mass from them and carry it away just cost way less energy because they have so little gravity and no atmospheres getting in the way. One good nuke could explode a small asteroid whereas even a Nicoll-Dyson Beam, which as I mentioned could pour out the equivalent of trillions of nukes a second and still need a whole week to torch Earth. 

**[00:05:11](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h05m11s)**  To do something like Jupiter, which masses a few hundred times as much as Earth, wouldn’t take a few hundred times as long but closer to a housand times a long, needing a thousand times the energy. Gas Giants are physically quite large for their mass since they’re not very dense which makes them a bit easier to blow up than an equal mass rocky planet, but it still takes more juice than just the increase in raw mass would suggest. Very massive dense things like white dwarf stars or neutron stars take insane amounts of energy to rip apart and a black hole would arguably be impossible to. 

**[00:05:43](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h05m43s)**  In any event, the Death Star is already on the stupid side of overkill so engineering it to blow up gas giants would mean gunning it up a thousand fold. A Nicoll-Dyson Beam could rip apart Jupiter for instance but it would take a week to torch Earth and decades to do Jupiter, though I can think of a few reasons why you would actually want to do that. Especially if you’re in the Transmutation game and want to turn your gas giant into construction material for a more robust Dyson Sphere instead of one composed tin foil. 

**[00:06:09](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h06m09s)**  Of course you don’t actually need to totally vaporize a planet if you just want to kill everyone on it. Even just torching off the crust is serious overkill. There’s an old episode of Deep Space Nine, “the Die is Cast” where a combined Romulan and Cardassian fleet of twenty ships is getting ready to torch an enemy planet and one of the crews says the crust will be destroyed within an hour and the mantle within five. 

**[00:06:29](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h06m29s)**  This is a good indication the Star Trek has a habit for aiming for scientific accuracy with all precision Star Wars does, I never know how Trek got a reputation as the science-focused of the two, and is pretty tactically crazy too. First it means your average Star Trek starship is carrying around the equivalent of a whole sun in its reactor, and second, as Chuck Sonnenburg from SFDebris put it, unless your enemy is the lava people taking out the mantle of a planet is pretty silly. Taking out a whole planet of Earth’s Size requires something like 10^32 Joules of Energy, again multiple days of our sun’s entire output, or something like a trillions tons of antimatter, which is around a million times how much that whole fleet should mass out at. 

**[00:07:11](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h07m11s)**  Alternatively you don’t even need a hundredth of that energy to strip off a planetary crust and even that is pretty serious overkill. It’s kinda hard to put an exact figure on how much energy you’d need to sterilize a planet since that would vary by planet and you’d need to decide if you were going for a 100% certain kill of everything down to the toughest bunker buried under mountains or tiniest microbes in the bottom of ocean trenches or not. But it’s a lot less than 10^30 Joules. Our atmosphere is about a millionth of the Planet’s mass and superheating that till it was hot enough to evaporate into space ought to do the trick, and that would require more like a few seconds of the sun’s output. And you’d probably want to go maybe an order of magnitude higher and dribble that in over the course of the target planet’s day so it can just rotate around on its axis while you peel it like an apple. 

**[00:07:55](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h07m55s)**  Key point there though is that you don’t need anything like an entire Dyson Sphere to give yourself a planet destroyer, so we’d have to consider all Dyson Spheres to have this capability same as they all can so the Shkadov Thruster trick of slowly moving the entire solar system across the galaxy. And if you got big lenses that can target planets light years away you’ve also got great big old telescopes that can flat out see planets with ease on the other side of a galaxy. So if you happen to be a genocidal race, even one that doesn’t want to roam the galaxy, you can pretty much torch every planet in that galaxy without leaving your home solar system, because you could devote less than 1% of your solar economy to roasting planet after planet, targeting hundreds at a time for whatever their day length was. An even if there were a hundred billion target planets in your galaxy, well, that would just be a billion days, or 3 million years, to get them all, way way less time than it would take for any remnant microbe left buried on the bottom of an ocean trench to respawn complex life on that planet if all you’d done was to rip off the atmosphere and boil the surface of land and sea. And you could get the job done a lot faster if you used your entire solar output or annexed some neighboring stars for this purpose. Especially a giant. Our sun is not very massive, while we call it a yellow dwarf it out masses 95% of all other stars and is about 10,000 times brighter than the weakest of red dwarf stars. But luminosity tends to go at about the third to fourth power of the mass and Spica, a nearby giant star only about 250 light years away and only about ten times our sun’s mass is more than 10,000 times as bright, and there are stars out there millions of times as bright that if converted into Nicoll-Dyson Beam could actually flat out vaporize Earth in a second, and sterilize thousands every second. They could torch every planet in the galaxy, even if every star had one potentially habitable one, in a very short time. They could probably sterilize a whole galaxy in a week and flat out vaporize them in only a few thousand years of output, and since the light would need a hundred thousand years to get to the furthest targets that’s not exactly a long timetable. This is one of the reasons why I tend to hand wave away the notion of xenocidal alien races creeping across the galaxy attacking everyone or sending out swarms of self-replicating machines to do it, things we could conceivably fight for a nice science fiction story. Sterilizing a galaxy if you’ve got just a tiny head start on everyone else is just way too easy. Now one of the problems with this is that since there is that really long lag time is that you not only have no way to call off the attack once it’s been fired, even if the shot takes thousands of year to arrive, but that aiming at something planet sized might just turn out to be beyond us for any clever tricks we might play with focal lenses. That brings up the main non-destructive use of these devices because you can use smaller forms to push big ships up to speed. So you could use these to move ships around your solar system, you can quarter your light sails same as a wind sail for lateral motion and you can stick mirrors out a distance to bounce light back inward to push ships in, or slow ships down as they enter your solar system, or adjust the trajectory of space stations and so on. 

**[00:10:48](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h10m48s)**  But you could also stick mirrors on the back of a fairly stealthy giant missile and speed it up over the course of days or week or months or years until it had all the kinetic energy got from the nicoll-dyson beam and then proceed on with just a little bit of steerage fuel and simple auto-pilot to go whack its target. And you can just send a small swarm of them to impact that place over a few days even if you spent years dumping energy into them. 

**[00:11:11](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h11m11s)**  They just get up to speed, fold up their light sails, and cruise in. Incidentally these are called RKM’s, RKV’s or RKKVs or RM’s or a few other variations, Relativistic Kinetic Missile, and basically describes any weapon whose sheer kinetic energy makes the inclusion of a bomb, even a warhead made of anti-matter, basically redundant because they already carry more energy than a bomb of their mass would release. 

**[00:11:34](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h11m34s)**  I’ve mentioned on the channel quite a few times that an invading alien armada doesn’t need to slow down and park in orbit to bombard us, they just have to throw some garbage out an airlock in our direction before slowing down and we’d get smacked up like it was World War 3. And if you’re using your Nicoll-Dyson Beam to accelerate your RKM’s instead of as a direct beam weapon you can include some sort of abort procedures in whatever computer or AI or suicide squad is piloting the thing. I’ve also heard Nicoll-Dyson Beams and RKMs in general described as equivalent to MAD, mutually assured destruction, or even flat out first use weapons since there’s no defense against them, no advance warning to get off a counter strike, but that’s not actually true. 

**[00:12:14](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h12m14s)**  Like any war scenario where your enemy outnumbers you or has more tech you are pretty screwed especially if they are fine with Scorched Earth styles of warfare, literally Scorched Earth in this case, since Asymmetric Warfare tends to be much harder to do if the enemy’s actual goal is outright genocide, which is not the case if you want to kill people and take their land. The main goal is to take their land. We’re talking about Scorched Earth, where the goal is killing them specifically and the land is just in the way. 

**[00:12:41](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h12m41s)**  But if you have rough parity of tech and numbers Nicoll-Dyson Beams and RKM’s are like anything else, and the apparent inability to defend against them is just a lack of imagination. 

**[00:12:51](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h12m51s)**  Like most cases you’ve got 5 defenses against a weapon. You can prevent anyone ever using it on you, either by diplomatic means or first strike, you can blow up the weapon so it can’t shoot, you can intercept the shot en route with something else, you can armor yourself against the thing so it doesn’t hurt as bad, or you cannot be where it is shooting. 

**[00:13:09](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h13m09s)**  In regard to the latter 3, both of these are weapons that take years if not millennia to get to their target. We’ve talked in the past about moving planets or solar system and that is itself pretty time consuming but not so much when you’re just trying to be one step to the right, as it were. You can proof a target against a weapon that can’t change direction – which includes beams and for the most part RKMs too – by just jittering you acceleration bit in a random fashion. It doesn’t take a lot of acceleration for a lot of time to move something as big as we tend to envision starship to be so that it isn’t where you’d expect it to be from observing its trajectory. It migth make the crew kind of nauseous, the spaceship equivalent of seasickness, but that’s okay. Now doing that to a planet or solar system is a lot harder but you can do it over years. 

**[00:13:54](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h13m54s)**  Alternatively if you’re a K2 civilization living in your own Dyson Swarm, trillions of rotating habitats, well as I discussed in that video they’re a lot more durable where life is concerned because while on a planet the thin shield of air is over you and the thick shield of stone is beneath you, it’s reversed on rotating habitats. 

**[00:14:13](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h14m13s)**  To hurt the folks inside you’ve got to burn through all that armor and shielding, and you can also shine the outside up like a mirror to make it more resistant to attacks of this sort. That also makes it a bit easier to give a good shove with smaller version of your own Nicoll-Dyson Beam and lets you keep all your habitats, which are much smaller targets then planets anyway, in positions that can’t be predicted years in advance unlike a planet. 

**[00:14:35](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h14m35s)**  You can also put swarms of mirrors between you and the enemy system to seriously reduce the weapon’s power and blow up RKM’s that ram into them. And while you can give an RKM a bit of maneuverability they just can’t be made to go zipping light years out of their way and steering back on course, and if they ram into just about anything they’ll be torn to shreds and scatter like a shotgun blast. 

**[00:14:55](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h14m55s)**  And you just can’t use one star’s entire power to torch an entire enemy dyson swarm since that’s like trying to burn someone to death with a regular flashlight, all you can do is focus on a spot and again they will all be mirror-surfaced and any give spot on the shell of a dyson swarm is on any given day composed of millions of different object moving on millions of different trajectories. You’d need a much bigger star or many different stars all firing at once. So the Nicoll-Dyson beam is a great weapon if you have first strike ability, having shown up on the galactic scene with a head start, and want to stay at home rather than expand out into the stars, but it’s not likely to be used for warfare when there’s a lot of systems that have them too. And it is more likely to be used to power RKM’s then as a straight beam I’d think. 

**[00:15:39](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h15m39s)**  And everyone would have them too. They’re just not that hard to build as an addition to an existing dyson swarm and you can scale it up as you add to your Dyson Swarm, and its simply too useful for other purposes. It would be great to have fusion powered ships or black hole powered ships like we discussed in other videos, but you basically need a small scale Nicoll-Dyson beam to make the KugelBlitz black holes we discussed there and even if you’ve got a fusion reactor on your spaceship being able to give it a big boost to speed initially, or slow down returning ones, with you Nicoll-Dyson Beams, saves you a ton of fuel allowing a higher transit speed or more cargo. So you might as well. You just have some massive thin solar sail like tinfoil that you spread out when getting beamed and otherwise fold up front to serve as extra shielding against radiation and get smacked by tiny relativistic particles while in transit to your destination. 

**[00:16:30](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h16m30s)**  So you’d pretty much always have the lensing device, or devices, hanging around your solar system anyway ready for some minor reconfiguration as a weapon that you could jam way more power through. So that’s our look at Nicoll-Dyson Beams and another look at an aspect of Dyson Spheres that’s pretty much inherent to them all. 

**[00:16:47](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h16m47s)**  As we’ve seen, you can use them to really increase your effective living area and energy access, you can use them to move planets and solar systems, you can sue them for transmutation of elements to just run great big supercolliders if you’ve got no better way of turning hydrogen into useful construction materials, and now we see you can use them to propel space ships and as a devastating weapon. We’ll get to the channel update in a moment, just as a headsup next week is going to be the Megastructures again as we take a look at Matrioshka Brains, another type of Dyson Sphere where we basically use a star as a giant computer. After that I’m not sure, and so we do have a poll this week for the next video. Here are the topics to pick from, a return to the Habitable Planets series with a look at Panthallassic Planets, also known as Water Worlds. A trip back to more modern times to look at Arcologies, the concept for giant structures on Earth that make Skyscraper look small, or Ecumenpolises, giant world spanning cities like we see in Star Wars imperial capital of Coruscant or Isaac Asimov’s planet of Trantor from the Foundation Series, these would probably include arcologies, but I don’t think we need to cover them first to do it and I can always wrap them in to this video if folks prefer. Or we can hop back to the Faster Than Light Series for our delayed look at Wormholes. Last option is to jump way ahead in time to the end of Universe to look at civilization after all the star have died and nothing is left but black holes, in the Black Hole Farming video. You guys vote, I’ll go with that. 

**[00:18:14](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h18m14s)**  Okay onto the Channel update. I picked this video and it’s follow up for next week, Matrioshka Brains, because the megastructures series in general tends to be my most familiar ground and usually are shorter videos, and with all the new things for the channel combined with me being very busy next week I wanted to go for videos that I could be sure I could get done in that time. No risk of getting writer’s block on the script, and the videos have been in the queue for a bit and I do want to clear the queue after skipping one week then having an unscheduled one after that. 

**[00:18:44](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h18m44s)**  The response to my request last week for help and suggestions for the channel was overwhelming, and from a personal perspective it was very uplifting. 

**[00:18:51](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h18m51s)**  I know a lot folks say their audience is the best in the world, and many probably even mean it, but it is nice to get objective proof, and the commenting and interaction on this channel is higher than most channels with ten times the views and subscribers. So we win on quantity and we certainly win on quality, the questions and comments are almost universally polite and thoughtful, and I genuinely enjoy reading and responding to them. 

**[00:19:11](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h19m11s)**  You’re a great bunch and you make creating these videos a lot of fun for me. I don’t think ‘thank you’ can really express the level of appreciation I have for that, but there it is. Okay so what’s changing? The simple answer is nothing, I accidentally gave some of you the impression last week I was thinking about moving or closing up shop. What is happening is we’re adding on features, some are definite, some I’m still considering, and a lot of them I’ll skip for now until the firm up. 

**[00:19:35](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h19m35s)**  I asked for ideas and I got tons of them sent in. I asked for volunteers to help implement them and got those too. So first, we’ve got a website under construction, that will be at IsaacArthur.net, and once that’s up it will be linked in all the video descriptions. I considered some sort of new channel name and maybe we’ll go that route one day but I couldn’t think of anything accurate or that didn’t sound like a jingo so I’ll just stick with my name for now. As that gets built it will have all the videos on it with FAQs and commentary and other features as they emerge. 

**[00:20:04](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h20m04s)**  Second, some folks mentioned a preference for being able to download the videos or just the audio portion to better accommodate mobile device and bandwidth and download limits, and we’ll be doing that sooner than later but it may be a few weeks and I haven’t picked a method yet. How fast that gets done will depend on available time so if anyone is already familiar with the process for things like itunes or soundcloud and has some free time to help, let me know. Third, I mentioned last time that the channel has a Patreon account now, and the initial wave was a very pleasant surprise, but I also mentioned that they encourage you to do rewards for patrons and after talking about this with some of you, a suggestion that came up fairly often was to raffle off the topic for a video from among the patrons, where the winner gets to pick the topic for a video, obviously within certain guidelines. I’ll work out the details and hopefully have that first contest before the end of July. We’d probably do it once a month. 

**[00:20:54](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h20m54s)**  In the tentative category, and of a similar concept, I’ve had it suggested I might do the occasionally sci-fi review and I kinda like the idea of having a featured author every so often. There’s already a lot of great reviewers out there, but books do tend to get neglected in video formats like this, so I’m open to the notion of looking at some of the classics from time to time. I’m also always looking for graphics and art submissions to be used on the channel, that’s something you can never have too much of, and I kind of like the idea of having a featured artist every so often where we can take 30 or 40 seconds out of video to take a look at those and let you know where to see more of their work, and maybe host a gallery of channel art on the website. 

**[00:21:29](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h21m29s)**  If we go that route the first winner would be Jakub, who kindly volunteered to do some of the cover art for the channel, and you can see more of his work by clicking on the link in the video description. Volunteer-wise we’re still looking for anyone with a background in social media, especially reddit, to help get the videos out there and to help administrate any sort of forum or facebook group the channel goes with. And as always I really appreciate when folks share the videos around. 

**[00:21:53](https://youtube.com/watch?v=RjtFnWh53z0&t=00h21m53s)**  Anyway that’s the situation as of now, there some more but it’s not flushed out yet, keep sending me ideas because they’ve been great ones so far. More updates as they develop in the next month. As always questions and comments are welcome, I may be a bit delayed answering them this week since I need to get the next video ready before I go off for a few days midweek for a conference, but I will get to them. If you enjoyed the video, hit the like button, share it with others, and don’t forget to subscribe for alerts for new videos. Thanks for watching, and we’ll see you next time! 





